Morning.
Mr. Norris, if you would just kindly give me your title.
Yep.
My name's Roger Norris, and I'm the Deputy Chapter Librarian in Durham.
So that's the Deputy Librarian to the Dean and Chapter of Durham.
Why don't you just tell me a bit about the room that we're in right now?
Fine.
Well, the room we're in now is the refectory of the monastery, and it's in the South Cloister,
of the conventional complex of Durham Cathedral.
It has an 11th century undercloth and this room is equipped with 17th century bookcases in the very traditional college library system that you see throughout Europe of press marks with each bookcase having a letter and each shelf having a number and then each book having a number within that shelf.
The books that are kept in this room are mainly printed books between 1500 and 1800 and there is a big collection of music which is also here of cathedral books from the organ loft and from the choir and secular music as well and a lot of antiquarian manuscripts from the great historians of Durham County as well.
And approximately how many titles would you say are in here?
In here, probably just over 20,000.
In the whole library, about 50,000.
So it's quite a modest size as far as libraries go.
And this is very much a working library.
It is, yes.
This is not something that's beautiful.
Well, I hope it's both, but it is a working library.
Tell me a little bit about...
what this does for the scholar?
What kind of scholar comes here?
Printed books are quite difficult to exploit.
The early printed books are not very much used.
They're not very much used anywhere.
The sort of material that is used most heavily, we find, amongst the antiquarian and early material is, first of all, music.
We get lots of inquiries, both in person and by letter and by email, relating to the music that we've got, because that's quite an important collection.
I think the use of collections depends on their uniqueness or their rarity.
And then antiquarian collections are quite well used, but it is the music which is most heavily used.
And then, of course, we also have a big collection of Anglo-Saxon and medieval...
literary and scholarly manuscripts historical scientific musical legal from the prior and convent the the anglo-saxon ones of course come from lindisfarne jarrow mount wearmouth those early benedictine houses associated with chalfrith and benedict bishop and the venerable bead and of course saint cuthbert around whom this place is built
And they were all here, these Anglo-Saxon and Bernardo Bede.
Well Bede and St.
Cuthbert are both buried in the cathedral.
I know they are, but I mean that these manuscripts of which you speak are here.
Some of them.
Some Anglo-Saxon books from those early monasteries are here.
We have about, I don't know, 15 or 20, which might be associated with those early houses and with the early foundation of Durham.
And then...
quite a number of 11th century and 12th century books as well.
So we're particularly rich on those Anglo-Saxon things and 11th and 12th century material.
But of course, at the dissolution of the monastery in 1539-40, a lot of books were dispersed throughout the country from all monasteries.
The books that didn't survive at all anywhere are the liturgies, the service books of monasteries.
They were destroyed, including here.
Oh, including hearing everywhere.
They're rare survivals.
They represented so strongly the old regime that people wanted to get rid of memories of, I suppose.
About a huge number of other books survived.
Absolutely vast.
And although we've got about 300 odd early manuscript books here from Durham, there are about another 200 or so
surviving in other places from Darwin.
And then other monasteries and their linear descendants into modern day cathedrals also have loads of manuscripts left that you'll know of.
York, Worcester, Winchester, Canterbury, Westminster, all those places.
And this, you mentioned that in this room were printed books 17th to 20th century.
Yes, 16th to 20th century.
16th to...
18th century in here.
And then in the dormitory, which we can look at in a while, they're the more modern books.
Will we be able to see some of the manuscripts?
Sure, yes, we'll do everything you want to do, that's fine.
And this room dates from what?
Well, originally it would date from the 13th century, 13th, 14th century, and then it's been heavily restored and altered, as you can see.
The windows are 19th, 20th century,
the upper part of the walls are probably 17th century and it's probably only the lower part which still has some remains of medieval wall paintings behind the wainscoting, behind the wooden panelling that is really original.
How is it that this cathedral survived the dissolution?
Oh, loads of cathedrals survived.
It was a healthy, wealthy and quite well behaved cathedral and so I think that
it was acknowledged that those cathedrals which were not corrupt, that were not impoverished, that had not put their foot in it, that they'd kept their noses clean, and they could survive.
What happened was they were dissolved, the monastic institution was dissolved, and then within a very short time it was re-founded, a new charter given for
a new cathedral with a dean and canons instead of a prior and convent.
And indeed, the last prior of this monastery was the first dean, a man called Hugh Whitehead.
So there was a strong continuity and no destruction of buildings or anything like that.
Obviously, there was in a lot of other places, but I mean, a lot of places did survive reasonably intact.
And who is that portrait of over there?
That's a man called John Sudbury.
Hello folks, can I help you at all?
Can I help you at all?
Okay, fine.
That's a man called John Sudbury who provided the endowment for this, for the bookcases and for the furnishings in this room.
But of course what you're sitting at is quite nice, you'll appreciate it.
You're sitting on a monastic bench from the 15th century and you're sitting at a monastic table from the medieval refectory.
on its original trestles, and there's another one up there with their benches as well.
Well, can we assume then that some ancient copyists work at these tables?
You could assume that some ancient copyists would eat at these tables.
I think you can't assume that they would study or write.
No.
The monastatic scriptorium in northern Europe would mainly be in the north groisters of monasteries, because that's where you get most sunshine.
I think after the 12th century, monastic scriptoria became less and less common as far as copying beautiful books went, that more and more you got companies of lay stationers, people being commissioned to do work, who wouldn't necessarily be religious or monks or anything of the sort.
It became an institution.
It became an industry, yeah.
It became a profession, a craft, yeah.
And, of course, the works went beyond, at that point, theological.
Certainly, yeah.
It became quite secular.
That's right.
Was there a scriptorium attached to this cathedral?
Well, there was a place where writing could be done.
I don't know whether we'd glorify it necessarily in the name of a scriptorium.
But that would be in the North Croister, yeah.
Is that something we'll be able to see?
Yeah, yeah.
It's not visible as a scriptorium anymore.
It's nothing like what you see in Umberto Echoes, The Name of the Rose.
But, because in Southern Europe, it doesn't matter where you have your scriptorium, because the light is so gorgeous anyway.
But in Northern Europe, obviously, they had to be careful that they could exploit the daylight as much as possible.
And so they would inevitably, where the croister is,
That's right.
The north cloister is the one that gets the great proportion of the sun in the north.
Were these books chained once upon a time?
No, no.
Monastic books aren't chained, no.
We're going out to Hereford tomorrow.
Yeah, that's not a monastic library.
That's a library of secular canons.
The difference is that monastic books didn't usually have access
to them by you and I. If we weren't monks, then we wouldn't get access to the books of a monastery.
The cloister was the enclosure, so you and I didn't get into that.
But, of course, in churches, in minsters, in Augustinian houses, places like Yorkminster, where there would be a
a library not attached to a monastery, they might well have been chained, yes.
And of course, Harryford, as you say.
But ours never have been, no.
And you'll also find in a public library, like Duke Humphrey's library, in the Bodleian, that they're chained, those early books are chained, because they were public.
And so people could come in and use them, who might be anyone.
They could also take them away if they weren't chained.
Do you mind if I take a photograph of you right where you are?
No.
You might just want to fix your collar, haven't you?
Really?
Oh, your jacket here.
Oh, right.
Oh, yes, I see.
Yes, how dreadful.
Oh, gosh, it's probably been like that for weeks.
So tell me what we call these peat pieces.
I don't know what we call them, but the little areas where people will write in a monastic cloister are sometimes called carols, which is a sort of enclosure.
But the bookcases here, I suppose, attempt to represent what the 17th century bivouphile thought that the monastic or the medieval library would look like.
And it looks quite nice, doesn't it?
It's beautiful.
And these are all letters, so I see.
Do we call these bays?
We call them presses, actually.
We call them presses, which is a name for a cupboard.
Right.
But I mean, the areas that they're in, they're almost like alcoves.
That's right, yeah.
But we call the bookcases presses.
They are presses.
And let's see, how many do we have?
Well, we've got from B, excluding J, through to R. And so A is missing, but it isn't really, because it's been supplanted by something else.
And S is also missing, but that isn't really because that's been changed, yeah.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 16, 17, 18.
It would have to be an even number.
Okay.
2, 4, 6, 8.
It would have to be 16.
16.
Yeah.
And tell me a bit about yourself.
I'm just a librarian.
Librarians are no ones, you know.
Come on, let's go and have a look at our strongroom and then you can say, do you want to, how are we going to take it?
Our strongroom, if you want to bring things up and look at them at your leisure, then you're very welcome to do that if you'd like to.
What do you normally do in these places?
Really, I'd like to get a sense of the ambience and some quotations from you that I can use.
And give us an introduction to the institution and the holdings.
Sure.
I've got bits of paper that you can take away with you.
That would be wonderful.
That saves you taking too much away of notes.
That's great.
OK, do you want to?
There we are.
All right, let's go and do that one.
Is this something that this one of these is this something we could get a little one of these little booklets?
I haven't made any notes in it.
Let's just make sure.
Just came out yesterday.
Oh, really?
Okay.
I'm just going to take my coat off.
It's like there is compared to it everywhere else.
It gets lovely lighting.
The scriptorium would have been right here.
That's right.
And there would have been a series of desks
against these windows.
Well, would it have been open to the elements?
No, it wouldn't, no.
It would have been closed.
It would have had windows.
I think if you think of it without the dustbins or without the benches, and then you think of some of the cloisters that you see in Italian churches, it looks fairly similar with these buttresses, you know, which are concealed buttresses, which go up into the roof force, sitting out there.
So you can see there are peg marks halfway up the wall where cupboards might have been.
Hello.
Well, what we have in here are the remains of the monastic library that we have.
As I said to you before, these libraries from all over the place were dispersed to various places.
People rescue books, really, they rescue books.
which otherwise would have been damaged or lost altogether.
And so there are about 300 volumes from... There's one fragment from the 6th century, and there's substantial pieces from the 7th and 8th centuries, 9th, 10th, and lots from the 11th and 12th, and then there are later books as well.
And they cover all sorts of subjects, but as you might expect, the majority of subjects are biblical text,
commentaries on books of the Bible by medieval commentators and then books by early fathers and by early medieval scholars like Gregory and Anselman Alcorn and people like that and then there are chronicles and a little bit of literature and classics and a lot of law and science
Lives of the Saints, books about theology, all that sort of stuff.
And it's a very austere library, although we do have some books which are very beautifully decorated, there aren't any which have got sort of full-page decorations or anything like that.
So it was a very learned community, really, and I think that's why Eton and other similar ones like Canterbury and your...
well York didn't have a community but it had a big library.
Worcester, well Canterbury, Worcester and Durham particularly survived because they had their own colleges in Oxford and so they had a strong connection with secular learning as well.
So it looks a bit of a mess in here at the moment because it's being used to store
all the museum objects while the treasury is being restored so that's the coffin of st cutler there and it looks a bit odd because it's all covered up for its own protection but that's the coffin in which he was buried in 698 so um wasn't there a book found that's right yes well uh no there was a book which was dispersed at the distribution of the monasteries
which was with his copy, which is a small Gospel according to St John, which is the Stonyhurst Gospel, which is owned by the Society of Jesus, and now on display in the British Library.
And the Lindisfarne Gospels, we don't know whether they were here at the dissolution of the monasteries, they may have been, but of course they were rescued by Sir Robert Cotton, and became part of his cartonium collection, which is now part of the National Collection.
The coffin was opened crucially in 1827, and that's when the cross was found.
So anyway, what did you want to look at particularly?
No, no, it wasn't very interesting, because there in Catalonia we have Beatus de Rihanna, we have in Nascogorje, there is a church, and we have Reatus de Rihanna.
Beatus?
And that's the name of the place, is it?
No, it's the name of this kind of building now.
Ah, right, right.
I think two months ago it was stolen.
Right, right.
Later, now they found it.
Ah, excellent, excellent.
So what we can do is take some books up and then you can...
We'll take three up and then you can have a look at them at your leisure.
I think we do have a, I think we do have a scan.
I'm not sure, I don't know.
No, I don't do that.
I know that we've got a Spanish Bible upstairs.
You don't want to see Spanish Bibles, do you?
While we're here, you might like to have a quick look at St.
Cathar's Cross, as you won't get the opportunity to ever see it again.
So that's the cross that was taken out of the coffin in 1827.
It's made of gold and garlic stone, and it dates from the late 7th century.
And you see it on all the armorials that are associated with Durham.
for the last 170 years anyway.
So... No, it's not.
So it's normally on display that because of the refurbishment we haven't got it.
And you see it's got a mend at the bottom piece which is an original break and it's been restored in the 7th century.
Isn't that nice?
Are his remains still buried?
Yes, he's still buried here.
That's what we hope he is anyway.
She's got to have a wart.
I don't think that's very nice.
You both are so young to be interested in cannabula.
Are you?
Are you young to be interested in cannabula?
Yes.
If we take a saxophone and a twelfth century, that would give you an idea of the sort of stuff that propriety with.
I think something
To give you a sense of a Saxon book, there's only one, you know, American Saxon book, which is from the Shady Library.
Which library?
The Shady, William Shady.
Oh, right.
Whereabouts is that?
It's at Princeton.
It's a wonderful series of libraries.
You've got all that part in the States.
Gosh.
I mean, there's only one Anglo-Saxon book, and all of nothing.
Here you have 20 books.
Oh, of course you should.
Yeah, I think it all works out.
It all works out.
So let's see.
Look at this page.
There's an 8th century one there.
There's an historical miscellany of the 11th century.
I think you're probably quite into it.
It looks all right, anyway.
They're not very highly decorated, so don't be too disappointed.
But we think they're quite nice.
This would be an original blinding.
Well, it's a bit late.
It's a 14th century book.
That's a service book.
But if we get to do a 12th century one, that will probably take that one out.
Right, do you want to have a look at them as well?
Do you want to come up with it and look at them?
Do you like to do that?
No, probably at 4 o'clock.
Yeah, I was leaving here.
4 o'clock.
Won't take that long.
Half an hour.
Where are you going now?
In terms of wandering around.
Look around.
Yeah, that's nice.
You don't have to stay, if you don't want to stay.
No, no, no, we want to stay the bonus time.
Okay, right.
Okay, can somebody else take that one?
The bindings, as you probably can see,
They're rather late, they're mostly 19th century.
There are about 10 12th century ones, and quite a few 17th century rebounds there.
But the high proportion are 19th century rebounds.
They're not too bad, but they look a bit ordinary, don't they?
What do we call this one?
This is called the Spendiment.
I'll give you a bit of paper.
Right.
And what was this originally used for?
It was used for this sort of thing, yes.
As you can see, it's been restored in the 70s, in the mid-1970s, when these bookcases replaced some other ones, and the floor levels were changed.
But we're beneath the dormitory now, and we'll be looking at that anyway in a while.
So, right, let's go upstairs into the library, somewhere in between.
Do you want me to close the door?
No, it's all right.
Now when you're looking at these books don't go near them with any
pens or anything and don't let your tie run all over it and don't rub your hands or put your fingers on any writing or any paint but when you turn over the pages just turn them over by the extreme edge
So, just like that.
It's all on casting.
There's something about the library for you all.
This tells you how to make ink and the various processes that are involved in making a page.
this character about what goes towards making up the different colours that you get in these books.
Now, the earliest one that we've got here is an 8th century gospel book, and it's quite interesting.
It's got varying hands indicating that different people have been involved in the creation of it.
It's in what's called an unsteal script, which is a clear, square script.
You can understand the alphabet quite easily, even if your knowledge of Latin may not be the most wonderful.
The vellum, as you can see, changes in quality throughout.
It's a matter of different animals and a matter of different processes of making it.
Anglo-Saxon felon, or skim, in these sorts of books, have to be very stiff and hard.
Hi, can I help you?
Do I better just go and see what's happening?
I don't know, I'll look back here again.
There you go.
In two columns, the ruling is done blind,
a blunt instrument which rules on the page and creates a frame within which the text goes and then you can see at the end obviously somebody else has done it it might have been that they didn't really finish it or it might have been that the end became missing and they had to
Re-complete it.
And that's decidedly two different hands.
Oh, totally.
Yes, yes.
Different style.
It's difficult to know, actually, whether it's a different hand.
It might be a different style, but my guess is it's a different hand.
It looks like that, doesn't it?
And there's a nice... Is that a wormhole?
Well, not worms.
No, you don't get worms in the vellum.
But what you get is injuries in the animal.
And so when the skin is stretched, then...
They're all imperfections which are within our bodies, you know, basking or stretched.
We would have lots of cuts, wouldn't we, and wounds within ourselves, and they become holes when the vellum is stretched.
And the evitations are in what language?
It's all in Latin, yeah.
This one is a late 11th century onwards historical miscellany, and it's
Again, it's very interesting.
What you see here, this is one book.
This is a history called Brute.
And it's quite late.
It's a 14th century tract.
But it's only that big.
Then you have the history of the English church and people by the Venerable Bede here, and something by Gilbert of Limerick at the beginning as well.
And that's not very big either.
But that's a 12th century copy of the Ecclesiastical history.
And then after that, you've got a 12th century rather informal little document, only about five or six pages long, or perhaps a little bit longer than that.
Here we are, start here.
It's a genealogy taking a bit from Adam to Woden around to Henry II.
And that's not really...
So all these little books have been bound together in the Middle Ages and then rebound in the 19th century.
And then at the end, there's this thing by a man called Martinus Polonus.
You see his name then, Martinus.
And it tells it here, it's from the convent library of the monks of Durham.
And so at some stage this was bound up separately in its own little...
uh cover so this was prepared here at last no not necessarily no not sure it was probably brought in and it's a quite interesting document it takes you through history so this is the year 1050 the year 1050 the year uh like i've been no it's not 1000 1400 i guess like that can't possibly be right but uh um
What it does, it takes us through the Popes, Pontificates, and the Emperors.
So, on one page you've got Popes, on the other side you've got Emperors, the Holy Roman Emperor.
So you've got Theodosius, Barnus there, and then who we've got there?
And who we've got here?
How would you refer collectively to this volume?
It's called the Chronicus.
It's called Chronica.
Chronica of Martinus Peronus.
And...
yes pope sixtus there felix so uh but for us of course the most interesting thing is is the ecclesiastical history of the venerable being uh it's a very late copy the earliest copies of this most important work are in cambridge and in st petersburg and um
The Venable B had a very wide circulation, his works were internationally known, and so it probably wasn't very important for Darwin to have an early copy anyway, but it would have been nice to have one.
But other places had them instead.
But how much earlier are these others?
The Venable B in the 8th century.
So B is from the 8th century?
In the 8th century, 1737 and Darwin.
Now this is a 12th century one and so you just see a bit of a progression from Anglo-Saxon to 11th century, 12th century, much more gothic appearance and this is a commentary on the epistles of St Paul by Peter Lombard with the text of the epistle and then the Peter Lombard's commentary round about it and there's ruling in black there.
A different sort of venom already, isn't it?
You can see how it's becoming much easier to use.
And then at the beginning of each of these epistles, or the commentaries on each epistle, you can see there the little print marks at the edge where the page is rolled across.
At the beginning of each epistle there's a sometimes a nice initial sort of thing.
So, anyway, there are three books for you to look at.
Do be extremely careful, please, with them.
You can see the whole purpose of the plan of the page is to enable you to understand the beauty of the thing.
And if it was a scholarly text that needed annotations, you could also make annotations within this margin.
But you have lots of white around the page which sets it off.
as all good printers do, let alone manuscript writers.
But it also enables you to be careful to just pick the page up.
I have a question that presents something of a paragraph.
You said earlier when we were in there that these books were prepared strictly for the nasty community.
So that's why they weren't changed.
Who were these magnificent illuminations made for?
Well they were made from art.
That was part of their offering.
They offered their lives in prayer and chastity and obedience and having made that terrific sacrifice obviously they wanted to make the very best
of whatever they did.
I think that would have been a motivation with some, obviously.
And those who were good artists, who were found to be good artists, would regard that as their offering.
And I dare say he would gain very great facility in doing it.
So these were not made for human eyes?
Of course they were.
Oh yes.
They were.
Oh yes, of course.
But there was this kind of
No, they were practical things.
They wouldn't make books if they weren't going to use them.
No.
But they wanted them to be beautiful as well.
As every craftsman, every producer of anything wants it to be praiseworthy, don't they?
You know, the most modest printer wouldn't want to present you with a production of which he wasn't proud.
And we're looking at an illumination that's... how old?
I'm sorry, that's 12th century.
Yeah, so that's about 1160, 1170, that's right.
This looks like it could have been done in five years.
It's very good, isn't it?
Yes.
Things shouldn't deteriorate.
We can.
The outer materials that they use seem to last forever.
This is gold, this must be... Perhaps it's last July, I don't know.
It's difficult to tell others, yeah.
I mean, I guess I would have done that for us today, wouldn't I?
Wonderful.
Really, can't it?
I don't want to take a little bit of advice, and I can't even use that.
No, I wish I would.
Okay, so, today.
Would you like to start?
Mm-hmm.
All right, that's great.
Yes, excellent.
Wonderful.
The English scribes and Scots and Welsh and Irish don't seem to tell us what they are.
Now in Europe they do, they're much more likely to say who has written the work at the end and say what the weather's been like and how their hands are cold and all that sort of stuff.
Our people don't seem to be very concerned to say oh I did this and that of course is part of their humility isn't it?
Now when you get later on in the middle ages it's much more common of course for lay people to indicate
where the work is being done, particularly near Montelis being done and that sort of thing.
Do we have a sense as to where this is?
The 11th century work and that historical work, the first one would probably be done in Jarrah or Wienland or something like that.
So it's fair to assume that this book has been here?
Oh, no, over 40 years.
Well, and there are a few numbers of these books around here.
And wouldn't it be interesting to know who's read the book?
I suppose so.
What would we determine by?
There must be sample.
Oh, we can't know.
I hope so.
Otherwise we'll never get it finished.
Would you want to sit down and enjoy them?
I'm reluctant to handle them.
Shall we go through into the dorm room quickly and have a quick look in there?
Sorry, you were going to ask something.
It's quite old, yes.
It's quite a date.
1745, there you are.
What was his name?
In the back of Calabon, or was it?
1745.
And so this is Darren and Lucia.
When did you arrive?
When did you arrive at Durham?
You've not been here before?
So really, the topography of the city is quite interesting because it's very fortress-like, as you can see, there's an incident.
Yeah, yeah.
Lots of hills, yes.
You came by plane, did you?
Yeah.
Yes, well of course York, as you come to the Vale of York, you think, oh my goodness, this is quite...
uninteresting land sometimes because you always show it as wonderful but the plane with a very flat plane between you so do you want to go then yeah thank you thank you very much thank you
This is worth the whole trip to England.
Great.
Okay, so moving on.
Do you want me to take a picture of the two together?
Oh, no, no, that's okay.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
And the picture up there shows that at the end of the 17th century, when those western towers on the running outside, fine, I had spires on, which don't survive enough, but there are... Isn't it interesting?
That makes all the difference, doesn't it?
You know, that's what holidays are all about, because
You think of the holidays that you've had, and what's memorable about those holidays is the things that have taken you by surprise, isn't it?
And when you've seen something you didn't expect to see... Well, my goodness, why not?
What a thrill at their age.
I'm a jolly pleased to meet them.
It's great.
And I also feel about that sort of situation is that these things are for everyone.
And you really mustn't be too protective about them.
Well, but it's hard though.
It's hard, yeah, it's got to be sensible.
But at the same time, everyone should be entitled to be inspired a little bit every now and again.
I'm so happy for them.
They have the curiosity to want to see these.
Yeah, absolutely.
This room is the dormitory, and we're celebrating this year our 600th anniversary of this roof.
It's a 1398 roof.
You can see where we are.
We're at the far end of the church.
We're at the west end of the church on the south wall.
And so this whole cloister, this room is nearly 200 feet long, is the west cloister of the cathedral.
And we're overlooking the River Weir, which is down in the deep fire, down the precipice, outside those windows to our left.
And so taking that there would have varying stages of the life of this church,
monastic house which was founded in 1083 between about 70 and say 120, 150 brethren.
And taking into account that not all of those people would be sleeping here at once because Durham, as I've said, its own college in Oxford where novices would be.
They had rest homes at Finkel, at Bear Park, at Coldingham, at Stamford, London, lots of different places, Jarrow, Wearmouth, Lindisfarne.
and then they would be dispersed throughout those houses during the year at different seasons and so probably 20 to 50 to 60 people might sleep in this room at any one time and typically of great monastic buildings it's lofty so the air is always beautifully fresh and it provides light from the upper casements from the upper windows in the same way that the refectory that we went into first
does as well so the the light comes in from above but it doesn't distract you because you know you can't you can't well there are certain windows to look out of i suppose but there's not much distraction in the refectory anyway for them to look out at during their meals so we think that within these alcoves that we can see all along both walls of this long dormitory room within each alcove there would have been
a little compartment where a brother or maybe two brethren, if they put a partition up, would sleep.
They wouldn't have any major properties of their own.
They might have their little cupboards beside them.
But of course it was poverty, chastity and obedience.
What was it in that order?
It was a Benedictine order.
Originally when the community of St.
Cuthbert came here in 995 with the body of St.
Cuthbert,
which is around which this whole church is built, then it was a non-monastic community.
It was a community of seculars, of priests, of laymen probably as well.
Then in 1083, William of St.
Calais changed that community of St.
Cuthbert, the guardians of the shrine, into a regular Benedictine order in the fashion of a great many others in this country.
And it continued to be that until the dissolution of the monastery.
So if you want to have a wander around, it's a nice room.
It's partly a public museum and partly a working library.
We said at an early stage that this room has modern books in relating to history, theology, monasticism, all sorts of things.
And we try and keep that collection up.
You mentioned that after the dissolution, the Catholic Church,
There was a rather seamless, not necessarily seamless, but an orderly transition.
Very, yes, you're absolutely right.
Yeah.
The Anglican Church?
Yep.
And is that still the governing body?
Yes.
Oh, yes, yes.
This church was originally, in the Middle Ages, the dedication was to St Mary and St Cuthbert.
And then at the dissolution, it became...
dedicated to Christ and Blessed Mary the Virgin.
And so they made a change.
It is what is called a new foundation.
And, funnily enough, the new foundations of cathedrals in this country are, in fact, usually the older of them, because they've all been, as it were, re-founded in 1540.
But they were originally founded, say ours was originally founded in 1995, and
We're celebrating a huge anniversary this last year of St.
Augustine, which would have been, what, 1,300 years ago, or 1,400 years ago, yes, 1,400 years ago, 597 when St.
Augustine came to this country to be Archbishop of Canterbury.
Wow.
But we are celebrating 600 years of this roof this year.
I'm not quite sure how we're going to do it, but we're having a party, I think.
Those themes are...
They're from local woods, I suppose, yeah.
We're not quite sure where they came from, but probably from the Pryor's summer residence at Bear Park, which is quite near.
What kind of wood?
They are oak, yeah.
You wouldn't get root of this sort in anything other than oak at that stage, I think.
Those joiners or all the original joiners?
It's relatively unspoiled.
The only thing that's happened to it is that you've had an addition of these decorative
pieces which are non-structural to about halfway down the dormitory in the 18th century but otherwise it's still the very austere looking roof isn't it it's very plain, massive, terrifically strong from the 14th century so I'll just leave you to have a wander around and then when you talk about
to each other about things, and then maybe you'll have one or two things that you want to ask me again.
I think probably in the Middle Ages we wouldn't have had a window as big as that.
That has definitely been changed.
I get the impression it would have been much smaller.
Indeed, to have such a large window would have made it extremely difficult to sleep, wouldn't it?
It's two hours and 15 minutes, they said.
What did you call this book once more?
This is a commentary on the epistles of St Paul.
It's a 12th century manuscript which shows the epistles
with illuminated letter P's at the beginning of each epistle.
And surrounding the text of each epistle you've got the commentary of Peter Lombard, one of the great commentators of the early Middle Ages.
And how many illuminations are there like this?
There's about six.
It shows a little bit of sense of humour there.
You've got somebody having his nose pecked by one of these cross-century animals.
You've got a background of gold, which is gold leaf based on gesso, a sort of chalk base, so that it stands slightly further of the page.
You've got very strong colours compared with what we've got here on the right-hand side in the 12th century, in the 11th century.
The 11th century colours are quite pastel shades, aren't they?
In comparison with these really strong colours, strong black ink as well, aren't they?
It almost looks like graphic tape, doesn't it?
No, it's fairly gothic-y, isn't it?
This is still pretty readable, isn't it?
You can identify all the letter forms there without any problems.
But when we get to this, they're beginning to be inconsiderate.
They're squeezing the writing up into a Gothic form.
They're using lots and lots of abbreviations, assuming that you've got a good knowledge of Latin.
A lot of people did have who would need to read these books.
But nonetheless, it is...
It's getting a little more careless, isn't it?
It's less beautiful to look at than, say, the early part of the book, or it's certainly less beautiful to look at than the 11th century one then.
It's wonderful.
Look at the gold.
It's such a good order, isn't it?
But they did have a sense for the book arts, didn't they?
It's a work of art in its own... Well, I could talk all day.